poland
summary
Poland's real 2024 GDP growth is fore-
casted to exceed expectations due to a
stronger rebound in private and public
consumption on the back of slowing infla-
tion and high wage growth. The positive
medium-term outlook depends on the new
government intensifying, in 2025, re-
forms and investments that address
structural challenges, particularly accel-
erating the green transition in line with
the European Green Deal and adapting
the labor force to technological advance-
ments. A rise in national extreme poverty
rates in 2023, expected to continue in
2024, underlines the need to strengthen
the social protection system.

Key conditions and
challenges
The Polish economy has weathered global
andregionalshocks,underpinnedbyadi-
verse economic structure, integration with
regional supply chains, a commitment to
macroeconomicstability,arobustfinancial
sector, and tight labor markets that have
led to notable wage increases and con-
sumerspending.Theshockshoweverhave
weakened the fiscal stance, while the en-
ergy crisis led to a sharp increase in in-
flation which reduced purchasing power,
weighed down on growth, and increased
poverty in 2023.
The new administration that took office in
December 2023 marked the first political
transition in 8 years. It has since unlocked
frozen European Union (EU) funds and
shifted course on key agendas, such as
upholding the rule of law, strengthening
fiscal institutions, and steering the green
transition towards the EU commitment.
Poland's economic strategy is at a criti-
cal turning point: it requires boosting pro-
ductivity through innovation, rapidly de-
carbonizing the energy sector to retain
economic competitiveness, and re- and
upskilling the labor force in the backdrop
of a rapidly aging population. Restor-
ing fiscal buffers while supporting invest-
ments in healthcare, defense, and renew-
able energy will require balancing effi-
cient spending and tax policy reforms.
Promoting the efficiency of spending on
social benefits and promoting adaptive
social protection remains a priority for
advancing inclusion.
Medium-term economic prospects hinge
on reaping the benefits of technological
and green transitions, advancing social
mobilityandinclusion, andaddressing la-
bor shortages. Meeting the technological
transformation and EU decarbonization
objectives requires investment and plan-
ning, including ensuring a just transition
that supports vulnerable groups while
containing regional disparities.

Recent developments
After a sharp deceleration in 2023 (at 0.2
percent) marked by lower private con-
sumption amidst high inflation and the
unwinding of household crisis support
measures, real GDP growth has accelerat-
edin2024.Growthsurprisedontheupside
in Q2 (3.2 percent year-on-year (y/y))
thanks to government and private con-
sumptionpickingup.Atightlabormarket,
staggered increase in the minimum and
public wages have resulted in one of the
largest increases in average real monthly
wage (11.5 percent y/y in Q2).
Inflation markedly slowed down reaching
2 percent y/y in March 2024—downfrom
itspeakof18.4percenty/yinFebruary2023
-,duetofallingglobalcommodityprices,a
stronger zloty, and fewer supply disrup-
tions.Thezlotyremainsstrong, thanks to
improved risk perceptions and an increas-
ing interest rate disparity vis-à-vis the Eu-
ro. Inflationary pressures are expected to
pick up in H2 2024, however, primarily
due to the phasing out of energy price
caps. This has prevented the National
Bank of Poland from continuing its mone-
taryeasingcycle,whichstartedinSeptem-
ber 2023 (75 bps cut). Headline inflation
roseagaininAugust2024(4.3percenty/y).
The banking sector remains well capital-
ized and higher interest rates allowed for
further improvement in capital adequacy.
Continuousstrengtheningisrequiredtofi-
nance growing investment needs, in the
context of an accelerated green transition.
Thefiscaldeficitwidenedin2023,reaching
5.1 percent of GDP, on the back of high
debtservicecosts(2.1percentofGDP),in-
creased defense spending (around 4 per-
centofGDP),untargetedmeasurestopro-
tect households from the energy and food
price shocks, and the time-lagged impact
of the significant personal income tax re-
formin2022.Itisexpectedtoremainatthe
same level in 2024.
Poverty rose in 2023 using Poland’s ex-
treme and relative concepts, as nominal
wage growth was outpaced by price in-
creases and the real value of several ben-
efits declined due to a lack of indexation
in transfers or thresholds and smallhold-
er farmers suffering from lower prices.
The rise in relative poverty—from 11.7 to
12.2 percent between 2022-23—was mut-
ed by real growth in pensions. These
compensatory increases however do not
extend to the poorest 6.6 percent of the
population in extreme poverty in 2023,
who rely heavily on means-tested benefits
whose coverage deteriorated during the
period. The ability of the Polish tax and
benefit system to reduce income inequal-
ity, which has risen since 2017, remains
comparatively low and is expected to re-
main at the same level in 2024.